# IPK Project 2 ZETA: Network sniffer
**Title**: IPK ZETA: Network sniffer\
**Author**: Elena Marochkina\
**Language**: en-US\
**Supported OS**: Linux\
**Gitea**: [xmaroc00_sniffer](https://git.fit.vutbr.cz/xmaroc00/IPK_Project2_2023)

# Table of Contents
1. [Description](#description)
    1. [Compilation](#compilation)
    2. [Usage](#usage)
    3. [Program Details](#program-details)
2. [Testing](#testing)
3. [License](#license)
4. [Bibliography](#bibliography)

## Description

This is a program that uses the pcap library to capture and analyze network traffic (**a packet sniffer**). 

The program can:
- print the names of available network interfaces
- capture packets based on various criteria, such as protocol type and port number
- print information about captured packets, such as their source and destination 
IP and mac addresses, port numbers, length, time in RFC 3339 format and payload data. 

## Compilation
### Linux

To compile the program, you can run **make build**, and to remove the ipk-sniffer executable
file, you can run **make clean**.

### Windows
The program can't be compiled for Windows.

## Usage
The client application requires  arguments to run:
- **-i eth0** (just one interface to sniff) or **--interface**. If this parameter is not specified (and any other parameters as well), or if only -i/--interface is specified without a value (and any other parameters are unspecified), a list of active interfaces is printed .
- **-t** or **--tcp** (displays TCP segments and is optionally complemented by -p functionality).
- **-u** or **--udp** (displays UDP datagrams and is optionally complemented by-p functionality).
- **-p 23** (extends previous two parameters to filter TCP/UDP based on port number; if this parameter is not present, then no filtering by port number occurs; if the parameter is given, the given port can occur in both the source and destination part of TCP/UDP headers).
- **--icmp4** (displays only ICMPv4 packets).
- **--icmp6** (displays only ICMPv6 echo request/response).
- **--arp** (display only ARP frames).
- **--ndp** (displays only ICMPv6 NDP packets).
- **--igmp** (displays only IGMP packets).
- **--mld** (displays only MLD packets).
Unless protocols are explicitly specified, all (i.e., all content, regardless of protocol) are considered for printing.
- **-n 10** (specifies the number of packets to display, i.e., the "time" the program runs; if not specified, consider displaying only one packet, i.e., as if -n 1)
All arguments can be in any order.

      Usage: ./ipk-sniffer [-i interface | --interface interface] {-p port [--tcp|-t] [--udp|-u]} [--arp] [--icmp4] [--icmp6] [--igmp] [--mld] {-n num}

## Program Details
### Included libraries
The code uses the following libraries:

- **stdio.h**: Provides basic input/output operations such as printf and scanf.
- **string.h**: Provides functions for manipulating strings such as strcpy and strcat.
- **getopt.h**: Provides functions for parsing command-line arguments.
- **stdbool.h**: Defines the Boolean data type and its possible values.
- **stdlib.h**: Provides functions for memory allocation and manipulation such as malloc and free.
- **ctype.h**: Provides functions for character handling such as isdigit.
- **pcap.h**: Provides functions for capturing and processing network packets.
- **time.h**: Provides functions for working with date and time.
- **net/ethernet.h**: Defines Ethernet packet structures.
- **arpa/inet.h**: Provides functions for working with Internet addresses.
- **sys/socket.h**: Provides functions for working with sockets.

### Global Variables
**err_buf[PCAP_ERRBUF_SIZE]** - err_buf is a character array (i.e., a string) of size
PCAP_ERRBUF_SIZE that is used to store error messages generated by libpcap, a 
library for capturing network traffic.

### Program Components
#### Sniffer

The **"sniffer.h"** contains multiple helper functions to print information about 
packets captured by a sniffer program.

**Functions**

**void timeval_to_string(struct timeval time, const char \*format)**

*Input parameters*:

- **time**: a struct timeval representing the timestamp of the captured packet.
- **format**: a constant character array representing the format of the timestamp string.

*Output*: none

*Description*: This function converts a struct timeval timestamp to a string format.

**print_ip_and_ports(u_char *packet)**

*Input parameters*:
- **packet**: u_char pointer representing the captured packet.

*Output*: none

*Description*: This function prints the source and destination IP addresses and ports of the captured packet.
- If the protocol of the packet is TCP or UDP, the function extracts the source and destination ports from the packet, and prints them out as well. The function uses bitwise operations to extract the 16-bit port numbers from the packet. The offset values for the source and destination ports depend on whether the packet is IPv4 or IPv6.
- If the Ethernet type of the packet is ARP (Address Resolution Protocol), the function extracts the source and destination IP addresses from the packet and prints them out, without considering any port numbers.

**print_package_data(uint8_t \*data, size_t size)**

*Input Parameters*:
- **data**: A pointer to an array of bytes (uint8_t) that contains the package data.
- **size**: The size of the array (data) in bytes.

*Output*:
This function does not return any value. Instead, it prints the package data in a formatted manner.

*Description*:
The function takes an array of bytes and its size as input and prints the data in a
formatted way to the console, displaying the hexadecimal representation of each byte
as well as its ASCII representation. 

**packet_handler(u_char \*args, const struct pcap_pkthdr \*header, const u_char \*packet)**

*Input Parameters*:
- **args**: A pointer to the arguments passed to the function.
- **header**: A pointer to the pcap_pkthdr structure that contains the packet header.
- **packet**: A pointer to the packet data.

*Output*:
  This function does not return any value. Instead, it prints various information about the packet in a formatted 
manner.

*Description*:
- The function first prints the timestamp of the packet in a formatted manner. 
- Then, it prints the source and destination MAC addresses of the packet. 
- After that, it prints the length of the packet. 
- The function then calls the print_ip_and_port function to print the IP address 
and port of the packet. 
- Finally, the function prints the package data in a formatted manner using the print_package_data function.

#### Filter

The **"filter.h"** header provides functions for creating packet filters using the libpcap library. 
These functions allow the user to specify various criteria, such as protocol type,
port number, and protocol flags, to filter the packets that will be captured.

**Functions**

**void add_protocol(char\* filter_str, const char\* protocol_name, bool* empty)**

*Input parameters*:
- **filter_str**: a character array representing the filter expression to which the protocol name will be added.
- **protocol_name**: a constant character array representing the name of the protocol to be added to the filter expression.
- **empty**: a boolean pointer indicating whether the filter expression is empty or not.

*Output*: none

*Description*: 
This function is a helper function to add a protocol to the filter expression.

**void add_port(char\* filter_str, int port_num, bool\* empty, int tcp_flag, int udp_flag)**

*Input parameters*:
- **filter_str**: a character array representing the filter expression to which the port number will be added.
- **port_num**: an integer representing the port number to be added to the filter expression.
- **empty**: a boolean pointer indicating whether the filter expression is empty or not.
- **tcp_flag**: an integer indicating whether the TCP flag is set or not.
- **udp_flag**: an integer indicating whether the UDP flag is set or not.

*Output*: none

*Description*: This function is a helper function to add a port to the filter expression.

**void create_filter_expression(char\* filter_str, int port, int tcp_flag, int udp_flag, int arp_flag, int icmp4_flag, int icmp6_flag, int ndp_flag, int igmp_flag, int mld_flag)**

*Input parameters:*
- **filter_str**: a character array representing the filter expression to be created.
- **port**: an integer representing the port number to be added to the filter expression. It can be -1 if the port flag is not set.
- **tcp_flag**: an integer indicating whether the TCP flag is set or not.
- **udp_flag**: an integer indicating whether the UDP flag is set or not.
- **arp_flag**: an integer indicating whether the ARP flag is set or not.
- **icmp4_flag**: an integer indicating whether the ICMPv4 flag is set or not.
- **icmp6_flag**: an integer indicating whether the ICMPv6 flag is set or not.
- **ndp_flag**: an integer indicating whether the NDP flag is set or not.
- **igmp_flag**: an integer indicating whether the IGMP flag is set or not.
- **mld_flag**: an integer indicating whether the MLD flag is set or not.

*Output*: none

*Description*: This function creates a filter expression based on the given flags.

#### Main 
The main function for the sniffer program implements the core logic for sniffing network packets on a specified network
interface. 

It begins by declaring and initializing several variables with default values, including the network interface,
port, packet count, and various protocol flags.

The function then defines the available command line options and their corresponding parameters using the *getopt_long* 
function. It loops through all the command line options and their parameters to parse and store the user-specified options.

If no interface is provided, the function calls the **print_interfaces** function to print the names of all available 
network interfaces and exits the program.

If an interface is provided, the function uses the **pcap_lookupdev** function to look up the interface's network device,
opens the device using the **pcap_open_live** function, and sets a capture filter using the **pcap_compile** and **pcap_setfilter** 
functions based on the specified protocol flags.

Finally, the function enters a loop to capture packets using the **pcap_loop function**. 
For each packet, it passes the packet to the packet_handler function, which parses and prints the packet's details to 
the console. If a packet count was specified, the loop exits after capturing the specified number of packets. 

Once all packets have been captured, the function closes the capture device using the **pcap_close**
function and exits the program.

## Testing
1. The scenario where no interface is provided.

**Input:**
```
make && sudo ./ipk-sniffer
make && sudo ./ipk-sniffer -i
make && sudo ./ipk-sniffer --interface
```

**Output:**

```
en0
awdl0
en3
en4
stf0
```

2. The scenario where protocols are given but no interface is provided.

**Input:**
```
make && sudo ./ipk-sniffer -t
make && sudo ./ipk-sniffer --udp
make && sudo ./ipk-sniffer --udp -t -p 23 --arp
etc
```

**Output:**
```
Error: no interface provided
```

4. The scenario where interface is provided but it doesn't exist.

**Input:**
```
make && sudo ./ipk-sniffer -i 8908  
make && sudo ./ipk-sniffer --interface 89fhjhfbw
```
**Output:**
```
Error: 8908: No such device exists (BIOCSETIF failed: Device not configured)
```

5. The scenario where port number is not valid.

**Input:**
```
make && sudo ./ipk-sniffer -i en0 -p 65536
```

**Output:**
```
Invalid port number. Please enter a port number less than 65535
```

6. The scenario where protocols and interface are given; the number of packets is set by 1 or not set.
Port number is valid.

**Input:**
```
make && sudo ./ipk-sniffer -i en0 -p 443 --tcp -u -n 1
make && sudo ./ipk-sniffer -i en0 -p 443 --tcp --udp
```

**Output:**
```
timestamp: 2023-04-17T00:43:30.772+02:00
src mac: b2:67:b5:a7:7e:64
dst mac: d0:88:0c:77:22:81
frame length: 70 bytes
src IP: 149.154.167.151
dst IP: 172.20.10.5
src port: 443
dst port: 65123

0x0000: d0 88 0c 77 22 81 b2 67 b5 a7 7e 64 08 00 45 02 ...w"..g..~d..E.
0x0010: 00 38 d4 a9 00 00 35 06 bd c9 95 9a a7 97 ac 14 .8....5.........
0x0020: 0a 05 01 bb fe 63 5a 07 5b 23 5d d0 6e cb 80 18 .....cZ.[#].n...
0x0030: 80 00 81 ad 00 00 01 01 08 0a cc 4e 24 f1 8c 87 ...........N$...
0x0040: c8 3d 90 4b 29 82                               .=.K).
```

7. The scenario where interface and port is given and tcp flag is configured (*port is printed*)

**Input:**
```
make && sudo ./ipk-sniffer -i en0 --tcp -p 443
make && sudo ./ipk-sniffer -i en0 -t -p 443
make && sudo ./ipk-sniffer -interface en0 --tcp -p 443
make && sudo ./ipk-sniffer -interface en0 -t -p 443
```
**Output:**
```
timestamp: 2023-04-17T16:24:04.423+02:00
src mac: c0:c9:e3:89:20:8a
dst mac: d0:88:0c:77:22:81
frame length: 66 bytes
src IP: 45.14.133.24
dst IP: 192.168.0.102
src port: 443
dst port: 60260

0x0000: d0 88 0c 77 22 81 c0 c9 e3 89 20 8a 08 00 45 00 ...w"..... ...E.
0x0010: 00 34 10 26 40 00 34 06 c3 69 2d 0e 85 18 c0 a8 .4.&@.4..i-.....
0x0020: 00 66 01 bb eb 64 77 a9 f7 e7 4a 1c ab 80 80 10 .f...dw...J.....
0x0030: 02 60 f6 af 00 00 01 01 08 0a ac 2f 3c 5b cd 15 .`........./<[..
0x0040: 02 8a                                           ..
```

8. The scenario where interface is given and arp flag is configured (*no port is printed*)
 The same will work for icmp4, icmp6, igmp, mld protocols.

**Input:**
```
make && sudo ./ipk-sniffer -i en0 --arp 
```

**Output:**
```
timestamp: 2023-04-17T16:27:34.361+02:00
src mac: c0:c9:e3:89:20:8a
dst mac: ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:ff
frame length: 42 bytes
src IP: 192.168.0.1
dst IP: 192.168.0.101

0x0000: ff ff ff ff ff ff c0 c9 e3 89 20 8a 08 06 00 01 .......... .....
0x0010: 08 00 06 04 00 01 c0 c9 e3 89 20 8a c0 a8 00 01 .......... .....
0x0020: 00 00 00 00 00 00 c0 a8 00 65                   .........e
```

**All received data were verified using the program Wireshark!**

## License
This project is licensed under the GNU General Public License - see the LICENSE file for details.

## Bibliography
1. TCPDUMP/LIBPCAP public repository: http://www.tcpdump.org/
3. Using libpcap in C: https://www.devdungeon.com/content/using-libpcap-c
4. RFC 792 - Internet Control Message Protocol a RFC 4443 - ICMPv6 
5. RFC 826 - ARP
6. RFC 3339 -  Date and Time on the Internet: Timestamps
